Governor Hogan welcome to the daily
social distancing show well thank you
very much it's great to be with you
Trevor you are one of the governor's in
America who's fighting hard to keep your
states in a good place when it comes to
the corona virus outbreak where does
Maryland stand right now well
unfortunately you know we're a little
bit behind where New York and some of
the other places are but we're not
nearly as bad but we're still on the
rise we've just passed over 20,000 you
know cases and we just went over a
thousand deaths today so sadly our
numbers are still on the rise the
Washington area is starting to grow it
really has been an interesting journey
in America because you know some people
don't want anything to close down others
wanted shutdowns to happen immediately
but one thing that's been apparent is
many governors have been forced to go it
alone you know you're all making your
own decisions there hasn't been one
centralized approach I mean the
president said he's in charge and then
said governors are in charge so how are
you making these decisions are you
liaison with other governors or are you
just looking at what Maryland needs well
so I'm the chairman of the National
Governors Association and we have had I
believe 17 or 18 conference calls with
all of America's governors we've had I
think 12 calls with the president and/or
vice president and other calls with just
the governors and we're talking with
each other kind of one-on-one with
governors all across the country
Democrats and Republicans working
together and we really are sharing a lot
of information and talking with each
other about the crisis and how it's
affecting their states and the decisions
were making but governors are on the
front lines and we've had - we're in a
tough position making really hard
decisions I'm trying to make decisions
based on the science listening to the
smartest people and the infection and
how to keep our people safe while also
worried about you know our economy and
how it's impacting you know people
losing their jobs and small businesses
you have been talking to the presidents
but you've also been outwardly critical
of the president which is rare of a
Republican governor tell me what you
wish president Trump could have done
differently or where you think the
federal government could have changed
its approach in how it's working with
the states well I've tried my best you
know I don't think in the middle of this
pandemic where I think it's so
critically important that we try to all
work together at the federal state and
local level because the real enemy is
the virus and I think well there'll be
plenty of time later to go back and take
a look at what we
Donner should have done better so I'm
not trying to be critical of the
President or the administration they
have been working together and getting
some things done with us but I've been I
haven't been afraid to stand up when I
think that things are not going well my
job as the leader of the governor's both
Democrats and Republicans is to stand up
and say hey we're not getting help on
this we've expressed our frustration on
the lack of availability of testing and
personal protective equipment and a
number of other issues but look I think
they're making some strides and they
have been doing a good job of
communicating with the governor's and
trying to address our needs but we've
you know we've butted heads a few times
but I haven't tried to go out and I'm
not one of those folks that's just out
criticizing the president for no reason
I'm just pushing to try to get the help
that we need in our states yeah you
you've also been proactive in doing it
for yourself you did something that was
really unique you personally negotiated
with South Korea to get 500,000 testing
kits for I think nine million dollars
how did that happen and and why did you
choose to do this because I mean most
people would have said wait for the
federal government and you just went out
and got the testing case yourself well
you know we waited and the federal
government I mean the president made it
clear he kept saying he said this is a
local thing States should be doing the
testing now I'm not sure I agree with
that I think maybe the federal
government could have done more but we
had no choice we were put in a position
where governors were scraping and
clawing and crack trying to get tests
all over the country from various
providers and all over the world my wife
was born in South Korea and I happen to
have a good relationship with the
Ambassador with the president and we
just made a personal appeal we worked on
it for about three weeks my wife
speaking fluent Korean the books in
berea with a couple of other translators
with our scientists back and forth with
this company and you know landing a half
half a million tests for the people of
our state was a huge thing when states
around the country had no tests and so
we were happy to be able to get it done
and it took a lot of work and I want to
give the First Lady of Maryland a really
a lot of credit for helping us get it on
it it's an unusual
I mean states don't normally do
international deals like that to try to
get this kind of a thing but I mean I
was happy we were able to get it done
you know we're learning every day that
testing seems to be almost the most
crucial factor of how we go about
fighting the corona virus if we don't
know how many people have it or have had
it we don't
how to deal with it or move forward and
it's very hard for us to reopen society
and get back to work if we can't
identify and isolate and find out
exactly where the virus is this fellow's
friends yeah so let's talk let's talk to
that what are you trying to do right now
in terms of getting Maryland ready to
open up I mean everyone has to think
about when to open up but you can't do
it on this you know how many people have
or have had the virus so so what is your
plan as governor for your states so we
we laid out a very detailed plan that we
announced last Friday and we we listened
to the smartest scientists and doctors
public health officials in our state and
laid out kind of a safe effective and
gradual reopening because we've got to
get things back to normal in some way
over a period of time but we have to do
it safely so there's basic building
blocks we want to make sure we have
adequate testing we have surge capacity
in our hospitals we have enough of the
personal protective equipment and we
have we can do this contact tracing so
we can identify the people who have been
in contact with those people that have
the virus that's that's the first steps
and then what can you open up safely
we're working with all of our different
industry groups to say help us come up
with plans about how could you reopen
your businesses in a safe way that
protects your workers and your customers
I've been struggling to understand how
one state can open and other states can
stay closed when it feels like that
would be counterintuitive if people can
cross borders freely which is what
people can do in the United States I
mean you're hearing reports of the TSA
saying airplanes are packed once again
you know people are flying around much
more than they were a few weeks ago so
is there is there an element of concern
that there is no synchronicity to this
whole thing I mean if Maryland doesn't
open New York doesn't open and then
Georgia does in another place does
another place doesn't doesn't isn't that
gonna be undermined if people cross over
from one place to the next
you know the virus doesn't recognize
state borders or or international
borders and in in our area we're very
close with Washington DC Virginia and
Maryland and we're all kind of working
in conjunction with one another with the
governor of Virginia the mayor of
Washington DC to make sure that we're
we're sort of on the same page because
many of our
people live in one jurisdiction work in
another they travel back and forth on
the same metro system and it's hard if
one person opens up everything if
somebody opens up all the bars and
restaurants everybody from our state
will go over there and bring it back you
know so you've got to work together and
it's got to be done in a smart way but
the the president has said every each
governor is gonna make those own
decisions governors are making decisions
and we're hopefully gonna work together
and figure out ways that were not you
know spreading it from one place to
another whereas most countries in the
world seem to be fighting the virus on
its own America seems to be fighting the
virus while Democrats are fighting
Republicans you know it seems like it
seems like some states are making their
decisions based on the fact that they're
Republican some states it seems to be
making the decision in a different way
and and what's confusing to me is is is
whether some of these decisions are
being made for political reasons or just
based on the facts do you have a sense
of that because you talk to all of these
governors I'm sure that there's probably
some politics in some of the decisions
Trevor but I would argue that I've never
seen in my lifetime the kind of
bipartisan cooperation that we've seen
I've never you know we've had almost
daily or every other day we're talking
all the governor's talking to one
another sharing what's going on in their
state so different people may be making
different decisions but there's been I
think less politics than normal in my
colleagues I haven't really seen you
know people wearing red jerseys or blue
jerseys Democrats fighting with
Republicans we've been saying how do we
help each other you know how are we
dealing with this with our neck but you
know the my next-door neighbor governor
of Virginia the mayor of DC they're both
Democrats it doesn't matter to me we're
all in this together and I think there's
more cooperation and even in Congress
where there's almost never see a
complete partisan dysfunction they've
been able to pass four stimulus bills
through the house and the Senate with
Republican and Democratic agreement
nearly unanimously in like a month what
usually takes 10 years to get a bill
passed so there's still partisanship and
and and and there's still Republicans
and Democrats but I think it's been less
someone that has been pushed aside
because we have this common enemy we're
all fighting this virus in trying to
save people's lives before I let you go
I wanted to find out in your plans for
Maryland
self if there are citizens of your state
right now who are watching this and they
asking themselves when is it gonna open
how's it gonna open
I know that you started to think about
stages of how to open your state what is
your game plan right now so we're
waiting for our our numbers to kondeh
we're looking at hospitalization rates
and ICU beds and as that starts to level
off in plateau and when we see that
we're getting safer on the numbers we're
gonna gradually open up with some
quality of life issues that can they're
still safe let people get outside and do
certain things that are less risk you
know we have different categories of
risk so phase one will be things that
you can go back start to get things back
to normal some smaller businesses that
are low touch that don't have a lot of
interaction don't have a lot of people
jammed in together and then it's phasing
and slowly do things and two weeks later
take a look at where we are open up more
things and more things before you get to
the more the bigger opening up
businesses and bars and restaurants and
things like that takes a while but we're
gonna do it in conjunction with the
scientists and the business community
and to make sure that we're doing it in
a smart way because what we don't want
to do is rush it and then have a spike
and that's gonna be terrible for the
economy if we you know we would cause
another wave of this and overload our
our healthcare system well governor
Hogan I thank you so much for your time
and I wish you the best of luck thank
you so much Trevor thanks for having me
thank you so much for being here
[Music]